---
title: FOSDEM 2017 trip report
description: I went to FOSDEM and took some notes.
---

I like hacking and I like free and open-source software.  For this
reason, I try to attend [FOSDEM][] as often as I can.  FOSDEM is the
largest gathering of free software hackers and advocates in Europe;
possibly in the world.  Since my first attendance in 2011, I wanted to
do a presentation at FOSDEM.  When I embarked on my PhD in 2014, one
of my few concrete aspirations was to eventually present my work
there.  This I finally felt that I had produced something of interest
to a wider audience, and the organisers of the [track on
high-performance computing][hpc] were kind enough to accept my talk
proposal.  Of course, my presentation was not the only event at
FOSDEM, and in this post I will reproduce some of the notes I jotted
down with my trusty [fountain pen][].

[FOSDEM]: https://fosdem.org
[hpc]: https://fosdem.org/2017/schedule/track/hpc,_big_data_and_data_science/
[fountain pen]: http://sigkill.dk/writings/fountain_pens.html

FOSDEM spans two days and contains over 500 talks spread over dozens
of tracks.  I like to move a bit around; rarely watching more than one
talk from the same track in a row.  Unfortunately, FOSDEM attendence
has grown so huge that this is a decreasingly viable strateg.  While
there is usually enough free space to drop in on a [presentation on
porting a package manager to GNU Hurd][guixhurd], other rooms were
contiously occupied by the same people for every talk.  In some cases,
the dynamics seemed decent.  While the HPC track had an hour-long
queue, a good portion of the audience left between every talk, leading
to a natural audience rotation.  In contrast the Community and Perl
tracks seemed to exhibit little rotation.  I do not know how to solve
this problem, or whether it is a problem at all, but track organisers
should consider whether the situation risks limiting the growth of
their communities, as fewer people get exposed.

Fortunately, FOSDEM provides real-time streaming of all events.
Unfortunately, internet access at the venue was not always good enough
for streaming to be viable.  I suppose I could have spent the entire
conference in my hotel room, eating Belgian waffles and watching
online streams.

On to the presentations: the first one I saw was on Singularity.  No,
not the [technological singularity][singularity1].  Also not the
[Singularity operating system][singularity2].  *This*
[Singularity][singularity3] is a container system for HPC
applications, somewhat like Docker.  The idea is to have reduced
dependence on the global environment, letting admins be more fearless
with upgrades, and programmers more able to take advantage of specific
library versions and configurations.  I wonder if it could also help
with scientific reproducibility in computer science, which is a pet
peeve of mine.  Another important thing I learned was that the HPC
track had no voice amplification, and that I would have to speak
loudly.  I think I managed to accomplish this (judging from feedback
from the audience), but not all speakers made that observation.  On
the other hand, I forgot to put on the microphone used for recording
sound for the stream, so when the recording of my video finally comes
online, it will have no audio for the first minute or so.

[guixhurd]: https://fosdem.org/2017/schedule/event/guixhurd/
[singularity1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technological_singularity
[singularity2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singularity_%28operating_system%29
[singularity3]: http://singularity.lbl.gov/

There was a good [main track talk on OpenPOWER][openpower] given by a
person who really knew how to give a presentation.  Part of the charm
of FOSDEM are the unpolished and awkward, but highly enthusiastic,
presentations given by hackers unaccustomed to public speaking, but
sometimes it can be inspiring to see someone who really knows what
they are doing.  OpenPOWER is a wide (relatively speaking) industry
initiative based on making specs and patents on IBMs POWER
architecture freely available.  One particular motivation is the fact
that [nasty and unverifiable things][ime] lie hidden inside modern
Intel CPUs.  The supposed advantage of OpenPOWER over other open
hardware designs is the scale of existing infrastructure: POWER has
already been manufactured and used in production for many years, and
is a high-performance and battle-tested design.  We'll see whether it
pans out.  If OpenPOWER can challenge Intel's dominance in the data
centre - as seems likely at very large scales - then that would be a
goodthing.  Monocultures benefit nobody.

[openpower]: https://fosdem.org/2017/schedule/event/open_power/
[ime]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intel_Active_Management_Technology

I also attended a talk on [doing radio stuff on a GPU][radio].  The
presenter was recent, but I don't really know anywhere near enough
about software-defined radio to understand the problem he was solving.
I *did* get the impression that the GPU code was not fully optimised,
so perhaps it would be a nice use case for Futhark.

[radio]: https://fosdem.org/2017/schedule/event/gpupfb/

A hacker from Twitter gave a [talk][graal] about his experiences with
replacing the default Java JIT compiler (C2) with the Graal JIT
compiler.  They seem to perform about the same.  The most memorable
moment was when the presenter mentioned *"the benefits of Java"* in
the context of compiler construction.

[graal]: https://fosdem.org/2017/schedule/event/graal/

I listened to a hacker from Freifunk talk about [making Internet
access available to refugees][freifunk] via mesh networking.  The most
interesting thing here was an audience question on what it would take
to make Internet access a *de jure* human right.  I don't think much
activism is needed on this front - given time, it will soon be
*obvious* that access to information is a necessity for a dignified
human life, and the Internet will be the only practical source.  It is
unlikely that *uncensored* access will ever become a human right,
however.

[freifunk]: https://fosdem.org/2017/schedule/event/[freifunk]_access_is_a_human_right/

I have noticed a lot of recent talk about RISC-V, a new and fully open
Instruction Set Architecture (ISA), so of course I had to attend [the
talk on the subject][riscv].  Most importantly, I got confirmation on
the pronounciation (it's "V" as in "five", because it's the fifth RISC
architecture from Berkeley).  RISC-V is completely general-purpose,
built to be scaleable from micro-processors to supercomputers, via an
extensible ISA with various standardised extensions.  Industry seems
broad, with for example NVIDIA participating.  Maybe they are hoping
to replace their current use of ARM chips and save on licensing fees?
I will likely be involved with running the operatings systems course
at [DIKU][], and adopting RISC-V is something we should seriously
consider.  The main problem is that the privileged instructions ISA
extension has not yet been standardised, as it is necessary for
running an operating system, but someone ported Linux already, so how
incomplete can it be?

[riscv]: https://fosdem.org/2017/schedule/event/riscv/
[DIKU]: http://diku.dk

Due to the massive number of attendents at FOSDEM (more than 8000),
the customary beer event at the [Delirium Café][delirium] tends to be extremely
crowded.  So much so that I don't really find it enjoyable.  This
year, it turned out that the absinthe bar next door, [Floris][], had
plenty of empty space.  It was my first time drinking absinthe, but I
actually quite enjoyed it.  I will definitely try that again.  I will
also definitely try to attend FOSDEM again next year.

[delirium]: http://www.deliriumcafe.be/
[Floris]: http://www.florisbar.com/
